When the ancient people of Earth studied the night sky, they noticed that five “stars” moved with respect to the others. They called them “planets,” from the Greek word for “wanderer,” and kept careful records of
their motions. These records eventually enabled astronomers to figure out why the “wanderers” moved as they did: the planets, including our
Earth, orbit around the Sun. Over the years, telescopes have revealed the existence of three other planets, too faint to have been seen by the
ancients, bringing the total number to nine (including Earth).


The Sun is a star. The reason it looks so big and bright as compared with the stars in the night sky is that it is very close to the Earth. If the distance from the Sun to Earth (about 150 million km; or about 93
million miles) is scaled to about 15 m (45 ft), the nearest star to the Sun would be located over 4,000 km (2,490 miles) away. That is, if the Sun
and the Earth were located in Washington, D.C., the nearest star to the Sun would be in California. Most stars that we see are much further
away from the Earth; this is why they look so small in the night sky, even if they are similar to the Sun. The Sun is at the center of the Solar System. The planets, asteroids
and comets all revolve around the Sun. The Sun’s role as the center of the planetary system comes from its high mass; it has 99.8% of the mass in the Solar System and, therefore, guides the movement of the
other objects via gravitational forces. The light emitted by the Sun brings energy to the rest of the Solar System and largely dictates the temperatures on the planets.

The Sun contains over 99.8% of the mass of the solar system. Sun has eight planets orbiting it, plus a multitude of smaller worlds. At the centre of the Solar System is the Sun. It is a fairly average G2-type star. 
The Sun weighs about 300,000 times as much as the Earth and is 1.3 million times the volume. The Sun shines because it is continually producing energy in its core through hydrogen fusion. The temperature at the surface of the Sun is 5780 K. In the core, the
temperature is about 15 million degrees. The core extends from the Sun’s centre to about one-quarter of its radius, or about 175 million km. It contains about 1.6% of the Sun’s volume, but about one-half of its mass. 

At the surface of sun, we see the granules from the convection, but we also often see giant sunspots. Sunspots can be many times larger than the Earth. They appear dark because they are cooler than their bright surroundings, about 2000 K cooler.
Most sunspots remain visible for only a dew days; others can last for weeks or months. Solar flares are tremendous explosions on the surface of the Sun. They typically last a few minutes and release energy across the whole EM spectrum,
from radio to X-rays, as well as energetic particles. Solar flares are often, but not always, associated with coronal mass ejections, where enormous quantities of material are ejected from the
surface of the Sun. The two events now appear to be related but not identical. The Sun emits a high-speed solar wind, consisting primarily of electrons
and protons, with a few heavier ions. It blows continuously at an average velocity of 400 km/s. 

The innermost planets are the terrestrial planets – the (at least approximately) Earth-like planets. The terrestrial planets are small, dense, rocky worlds, with much less atmosphere than the outer planets.
They all lie in the inner solar system. 

Mercury is the smallest planet in the Solar System, only slightly larger than the Moon. Mercury is extremely dense, so must contain a very large core (~70% of its mass). Mercury orbits the Sun every 88.0 days,
and rotates on its axis once every 58.7 days. This combines to give Mercury a day of 176 (Earth) days long, twice the length of the year! Mercury has almost no atmosphere. Mercury’s surface is dominated by impact craters and lava plains. It
also has long linear features: scarps and troughs. The scarps are between 500–1000 m in height and can be several hundred km long. They are thought to have formed as the
interior of Mercury cooled, causing the planet to contract slightly. 

Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun and smallest of the terrestrial planets. It has a very tenuous atmosphere, which is only a little more
substantial than a vacuum. Sunlight heats up the surface of Mercury to high temperatures during the day, up to 450ºC (840ºF). At night, the
surface cools off rapidly, and the temperatures can drop down to -180ºC (-300ºF). This daily temperature variation of mercury is the largest of all of the
planets. However, Mercury’s day is much longer than Earth’s. Due to Mercury’s closeness to the Sun and its slow rotation, the length of one
day on Mercury is equal to 176 Earth days; that is, the time from one sunrise to another on the surface of Mercury is 176 Earth days (while
on Earth, this is equal to one day, or 24 hours.)


Venus is almost exactly the same size as Earth. Venus is completely covered by clouds. The atmosphere on Venus consists of 96% CO2, 3% N2, and trace amounts of other chemicals; the clouds are not
water vapour, but sulphuric acid. The pressure at the surface is 90 times the air pressure on Earth – the same pressure found at a depth of 1 km in Earth’s oceans. The temperature at the surface is 740 K (470o C), hot enough to melt metals like lead.
From the radar-mapping mission Magellan (1990–1994), we know that the surface of Venus is dominated by volcanoes: almost 90% of the surface is occupied by volcanic landforms.
More than 80% of the Venus is covered by vast low-lying areas of relatively featureless flows of lava.There are also about 150 giant volcanoes, up to 700 km in diameter
and up to 5.5 km in height.

Venus, a near twin in size to the Earth, has a very thick atmosphere composed of primarily carbon dioxide gas. The thick carbon dioxide
atmosphere traps heat from the Sun during the day and does not let the surface cool at night; as a result, temperatures on the Venusian
surface are over 464ºC (867º F). The high temperature and unbreathable thick atmosphere would make the planet very inhospitable to
human visitors. None of the robotic spacecraft (called Venera) sent to land on the Venus’s surface by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s
were known to last more than a little over two hours under the harsh Venusian conditions.

The atmosphere of Venus is 50 times as dense as Earth’s, with a pressure at the surface of about 90 atmospheres. It is composed largely of carbon
dioxide (96%) and nitrogen (3.5%), with traces of water, sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, and hydrofluoric acid. The clouds that enshroud the planet
are composed largely of small particles of sulfur and droplets of sulfuric acid. High atmospheric pressures greatly enhance the effectiveness of carbon
dioxide as a greenhouse gas. Because of this fact, Venus exhibits an extremely strong green house effect. In fact, the average surface temperature on Venus
is higher than any other planet in the solar system, even Mercury. Venus may be loosely called as “Earth’s Twin”, in that it is closest to
Earth among the other planets in the solar system in its size and distance from the sun


The surface of the Earth is concealed by the atmosphere, with its large cloud systems, by the large amounts of liquid water which cover 70% of the planet, and by vegetation; the latter two are unique in the Solar
System. The Earth is the only planet which shows evidence of large-scale plate tectonics. Earth’s atmosphere consists primarily oxygen and nitrogen. This
composition has changed significantly the Earth’s history, principally because of the development of photosynthesis.

Earth is humanity’s home planet. Most of its surface (over 70%) is covered with oceans, with the rest featuring a wide variety of land forms,
from mountains and valleys to plains and beaches. Earth has a thick atmosphere, which is mostly nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%), with
other gases such as argon, carbon dioxide, and water present in small amounts. The region on and near the surface of Earth (both above and
below ground) is filled with life. The presence of liquid water on the planet’s surface and the existence of life make the Earth a unique object
in the Solar System. Whether life could and does exist outside of Earth is the subject of study through the science of astrobiology.

Mars is half the radius of the Earth and about 10% of the mass. It take nearly twice as long to orbit the Sun, but the length of its day and its axial tilt are very close to Earth’s.
Mars has a thin atmosphere – 1/150th the pressure of Earth’s – which is primarily CO2, with small amounts of nitrogen and argon. Mars is a planet of extremes. It has
the tallest mountain in the Solar System: Olympus Mons, 27 km high; Mars has the the biggest canyon in the Solar System: Valles Marineris, over 4000 km long
It seems clear that Mars had flowing liquid water on its surface at least at some stage during its history. Was there ever free water on Mars – a
giant ocean in the north? Liquid water cannot exist on Mars at its current temperature and pressure. For Mars to have had surface water, its atmosphere must
have been significantly thicker.

Mars may also be loosely thought of as “Earth’s twin”, although for different reasons than Venus. Mars has a ∼ 25 solar hour day and a ∼ 25◦ axial tilt,
both close to the values for Earth. In addition, the surface conditions on Mars are the closest to those on Earth of any solar system body (although
the conditions aren’t that close, as you will see!) The red or orange color of Mars is due to Iron Oxides in its soil. On occasion the surface will experience
large dust storms, sometimes obscuring the entire surface of the planet for weeks at a time

Mars is about half the size of Earth in diameter. This makes the surface of Mars equal in area to all the land area on Earth. Mars has a carbon
dioxide atmosphere, but it is extremely thin, only about one percent as thick as Earth’s atmosphere. The thin air does not retain heat well,
and surface temperatures range from a frigid -130ºC (-200ºF) on a cold winter night to 27ºC (80ºF) at the equator on a hot summer day. Mars
has polar ice caps, made of water ice and carbon dioxide ice. There may be ice under the surface of Mars at lower latitudes, as well. The
Martian surface has features that look like dry streambeds, leading many researchers to surmise that at some time in the distant past, Mars
may have had liquid water flowing on its surface.

Between Mars and Jupiter is the asteroid belt, which contains probably 1–2 million objects. The largest are Ceres, Pallas, Vesta and Hygiea. Only 16 asteroids are
larger than 240 km in size. Altogether, the total mass of asteroids would make an object only about a twentieth the size of the Moon.

The Jovian planets—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune—are large planets located in the outer part of the planetary realm of the Solar
System. The Jovian planets are gas giants—large objects made mostly of hydrogen and helium. The Jovian planets are much larger than terrestrial planets;
for example, eleven Earths could fit across Jupiter’s equator. The Jovian planets are rapidly rotating objects: they rotate once around their axis in less than
a day while terrestrial planets take anywhere from 24 hours (1 day) to months to rotate once. They all have rings, and extensive families of
moons. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune have no solid surface on which to stand, and the apparent visible surfaces are just the top layers of clouds in their atmospheres.
Deeper in their atmospheres, the gases get thicker and thicker, until finally they turn into a liquid. At their centers, they may have a solid,
rocky core a few times the size of Earth

Jupiter is the largest of the planets, 2.5 times the mass of the other planets combined. Jupiter's visible surface is not solid: it is a gas giant. Everything visible on
Jupiter is a cloud. The different colours of Jupiter clouds represent different chemicals: ammonia, ammonium hydrosulfide, and water, The reddish regions are the coolest:
they sit highest up in the atmosphere. The Great Red Spot on jupiter is a giant storm that has been raging for at least 350 years, since its discovery by Robert Hooke in
1664. Jupiter has (at least) 63 moons, the four largest of which are known as the Galilean satellites, three of these moons are bigger than Earth’s moon, and Ganymede is
larger than Mercury.

Saturn is almost as large as Jupiter (85% of the diameter), but has only 30% of Jupiter’s mass. Like Jupiter, it is a gas giant. The most obvious feature of Saturn are the immense rings. The ring system
is remarkably complex, and is still poorly understood. It was Huygens who, around 1655, recognized that Saturn was "girdled by a thin, flat ring, nowhere touching it." Saturn rings are extremely thin – possibly only 10 m thick – and
composed almost entirely of chunks of water ice. The gaps in the rings are kept clear by Saturn’s many moons, either orbiting within them, or clearing them via gravity.
Like Jupiter, Saturn has a large family of moons. Titan is the largest moon of saturn(larger than Mercury, and second only to Ganymede); then there are six large icy moons, and a whole host of small ones.
Sixteen satellites orbit within the main rings themselves. Saturn’s largest moon, Titan, is the only satellite in the Solar System with an atmosphere. 
Titan’s surface air pressure is 50% higher than Earth’s. The atmosphere is made up mostly of nitrogen and hydrocarbons. Radar images show lakes and rivers, made of liquid methane and ethane. 

Perhaps Saturn’s most striking property is its exquisite ring system. All Jovian planets are surrounded by a complex ring system made of
icy particles. Saturn’s ring system is, by far, the most beautiful—an extensive, complex system of billions of tiny particles orbiting the
planet above its equator. The rings of the other Jovian planets are much thinner and fainter. Scientists are still trying to determine the
formation of the staurn ring particles; the most commonly accepted suggestion is that they are bits of dust blown off the planets’ moons by asteroid or
meteoroid impacts.

Beyond Saturn are the two ice giants: Uranus and Neptune. They are very similar in size, though Neptune is slightly more massive. Methane gives the planets their
blue-green or blue appearance.Uranus was discovered in 1781 by William Herschel, musician and amateur astronomer. Herschel became the first person in recorded
history to discover a new planet, at a stroke doubling the size of the known Solar System. In fact, Uranus had been detected, mistaken for a star, on 22 occasions during the preceding
century. After Herschel’s discovery, Uranus was not moving as predicted. Until 1822, it seemed to accelerate in its orbit, and to slow after that. Two young mathematicians independently suggested it must be
being pulled off course by a new planet.

Neptune was discovered by Johann Galle in 1846, leading to an international dispute over priority. On 12 July 2011, Neptune completed its first orbit since its discovery. Uranus is different from other planets, Uranus’ axis of rotation is tilted to lie almost in
the plane of its orbit. This means it has very bizarre seasons, with each pole being sunlit for 42 (Earth) years. During this time, the pole receives
more light than the equator, before being plunged into darkness for the next 42 years. Uranus has faint rings (which were easiest to see during Uranus’
equinox, in December 2007), plus at least 27 moons. Only five are of significant size – Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania and Oberon – and all
are much smaller than the Earth’s Moon. Neptune has thirteen moons, only two visible from Earth – Triton and Nereid. Both have peculiar orbits: Nereid’s orbit is highly eccentric,
and Triton is unique among large planetary satellites because it orbits backwards – opposite to the sense of the planet’s rotation.

Beyond the solar system (beyond Neptune), there is a large number of small icy worlds, collectively called the trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs). As of 2015,
there were nearly 1800 objects known beyond the orbit of Neptune, the largest of which are Eris and Pluto. The outer solar system is largely a mystery to us. the existence of comets
suggests that there must be a large number of icy bodies orbiting the Sun beyond Neptune, but it has only been in the past fifteen years that objects
(other than Pluto) have been detected.

Pluto has one large moon, Charon, orbiting every 6.4 days. Pluto and Charon are both tidally locked, so they always present the
same face to each other. From one side of Pluto, Charon would stay in the same place in the sky as the stars rotated past, while from the far
side you would never see Charon at all. n recent years, four more tiny (~ a few km) moons have been discovered around Pluto; Nix, Hydra, Kerberos and Styx, the smallest
of which is only about 20 km in diameter.

Currently, the most distant spacecraft are the two Voyager craft, both of which are currently leaving the Solar System. Voyager 1 is currently
132 AU (20 billion km) from the Sun, 38 years after launch. It is thought Voyager 1 crossed the heliopause sometime around 2014.

All planets, except for Mercury and Venus, have moons. Like the planets themselves, the moons are very unique objects. Our moon—the
Moon—is similar to the terrestrial planets in composition and structure. Moon's diameter is about one-fourth of the diameter of the Earth. Moon has no
atmosphere and its surface is heavily cratered by meteoroid impacts, like the surface of Mercury. The Moon is thought to have formed when
a Mars-sized object smashed into the forming Earth billions of years ago, Material was blasted into orbit around Earth by this collision, and
later pulled together by gravity to become the Moon. The Moon is the only celestial body to have been visited by humans (instead of just by
robotic spacecraft).

Mars has two moons, Phobos and Deimos. They are small objects that probably were captured by Mars at some point in the past, though it
is not certain exactly how it happened. The Jovian planets have large families of moons; the largest of the moons have been known for decades or even for centuries. Italian astronomer
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter in 1610. These moons—Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto—are now
called the Galilean moons in honor of their discoverer. The Galilean moons are all unique. Io is the most volcanic body in the Solar System,
with the volcanic activity powered by Jupiter’s strong gravitational forces. Europa is covered by ice, and underneath may be a global liquid
water ocean. Ganymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. In fact, it is larger than the planet Mercury. Callisto is a little smaller than
Ganymede. Both Ganymede and Callisto are covered with craters. Saturn’s moon Titan, the second largest moon in the Solar System, is the
only moon that has a significant atmosphere. In fact, its atmosphere is of great interest to scientists, because it is thought to have compounds
similar to those in Earth’s early atmosphere, before the emergence of life changed the atmosphere on Earth.
Neptune’s moon Triton also has an atmosphere, but it is much thinner than Titan’s atmosphere. Triton orbits Neptune in a direction opposite
to the planet’s rotation—this suggests that Triton did not form near the planet (according to how moons are thought to form around planets,
the moon would then orbit in the same direction as the planet rotates). Instead, it may have formed elsewhere and was captured by Neptune’s
gravity at some point in the past. 

The outer regions of the Solar System are home to the comets: Comets are dirty ice balls composed of ices (water ice, as well as other kinds of ices, such
as carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methane ices), rock, and dust. Comets are thought to be remnants of or the actual building blocks of the outer
planets, and, therefore, are a subject of great interest for researchers interested in understanding the early history of the Solar System. Comets spend most of their time in the outer reaches of the Solar System
and are therefore invisible to observers on Earth. At this point, the comet consists of only its solid body, the nucleus, which is only a few
kilometers across and darker than charcoal. It is only when a comet’s orbit takes it to the inner parts of the Solar System that a comet becomes
observable. The Sun heats the frozen body of the comet, and causes ices on the comet’s surface to sublimate—change directly from solid
to gas. The resulting gases blown off the nucleus, as well as specks of dust caught in the outflow, form a large cloud of gas and dust particles
around the nucleus, called the Comet's tails(coma). Comet’s coma can be over 1.6  million km (1 million miles) in size. Sunlight pushes against the dust
particles in the coma, while the solar wind—fast outflow of electrically charged particles from the Sun—interacts with the gas. As a result,
material in the coma is pushed away from the nucleus, forming the third component of the comet, its tail. It is not unusual for the tails of
comets to extend tens of millions of km (tens of millions of miles). If comets venture close to Earth, they can be some of the most striking
objects in the sky. In ancient times, people often thought their appearance in the sky was an ominous sign. There are two types of comets. The orbital period of “short-period
comets” around the Sun is less than 200 years. They are thought to come from the Kuiper Belt, the region of the Solar System where the icy
worlds called Kuiper Belt Objects reside. The second type of comets has orbital periods of more than 200 years. These are long-period comets
that are thought to come from a region in the outermost parts of the Solar System called the Oort Cloud (named after the Dutch astronomer
Jan Oort, 1900-1992). A gravitational disturbance from outside the Solar System (such as a passing star in interstellar space) is thought
to occasionally nudge inhabitants of the Oort Cloud and change their orbits around the Sun so that they begin to visit the inner Solar System
and become observable comets. Because the Oort Cloud objects are thought to reside in space hundreds or thousands times as far from the
Sun as Earth, the existence of the Oort cloud is yet to be conclusively confirmed with astronomical observations.

Asteroids are small rocky objects in the Solar System. They orbit the Sun like planets, but they are a lot smaller. The largest asteroid, Ceres, is a
little over 900 km in diameter, and it contains over a third of the mass of all asteroids (which combined is less than the mass of the Moon). There
are hundreds of thousands of known asteroids. Astronomers probably have seen almost all of the asteroids larger than 100 km, and about half
of those with diameters in the 10-100 km range. But there are probably millions of asteroids with sizes in the 1 km range that have never been
seen. Most of the asteroids orbit the Sun in the Asteroid Belt, a region between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Some of the moons (such as
Mars’s moons and the outer moons of Jupiter and Saturn) are similar to asteroids, and may actually be captured asteroids rather than having
formed in the same way around the planet as the other moons.

Sometimes asteroids collide with each other and pieces of them break off. These pieces of broken-off rock (sometimes called meteoroids)
travel around the Solar System, and on occasion they may cross paths with Earth and hit the planet. When they fly through the Earth’s atmosphere, they can be seen as meteors in the sky as the rocks burn up
because of the heating by the atmosphere. These meteors are often called “shooting stars,” but they clearly are not real stars. If the rock is sufficiently large, part of it may survive the flight through the atmosphere and fall to the ground. These pieces are then called meteorites.
Most of the meteorites come from asteroids, but some are thought to have come from the Moon or Mars, blasted off from their surface by
big meteoroid impacts. Comets leave trails of debris in their wake as they travel through the inner part of the Solar System. When Earth passes through these trails of dust and ice on its orbit around the Sun, the particles hit the Earth
and burn up in the atmosphere—these events can be observed from the surface of Earth as meteor shower.

The Solar System was formed about 4.6 billion years ago, when a giant cloud of interstellar gas and dust started to contract under its
own gravity. In the central part of the cloud, a precursor of the Sun called a protosun was formed, and around it, a rapidly spinning disk
was formed. The disk fed material onto the growing protosun, while at the same time, small grains of dust within the disk collided, stuck
together, and grew. Eventually the dust grains became large chunks, which collided and merged together, until planet-sized objects existed
within the disk. The planet-sized objects then “swept up” remaining material, pulling leftover gas and dust toward them, and continued to grow. At the same time, the temperature inside the protosun rose,
and eventually the temperature became so high that nuclear fusion, the power process of the stars, began. At this point, the Sun became a
young star. The energetic, young Sun blew away remnant gas from the disk around it, revealing the Sun’s family of planets. Asteroids, comets,
and other similar objects in the Solar System are thought to be material left over from building the planets—material that did not quite make
it to become a planet, or a major moon around a planet.This scenario for the formation of the Solar System explains observed
similarities between the planets. All the planets revolve around the Sun in the same direction (counterclockwise, as seen from above the north
pole of the Sun), and most of them rotate on their axis in a counterclockwise direction. In addition, all the planets circle the Sun in nearly the
same plane. All this can be explained because the planets formed out of the same rotating disk. The direction of rotation of the two exceptions
(Venus and Uranus; as well as the dwarf planet Pluto) may have been caused by a collision with a large object, for example.
The scenario can also explain the differences between the planets, primarily why the terrestrial planets are small and rocky, while the Jovian
ones are gas giants. In the inner part of the Solar System, the Sun made it too hot for much of the gas in the disk to condense into solid grains. Only small amounts of high-density materials like rock and metals
could be pulled together by gravity to form the small, rocky planets. Farther out in the disk, large planetary embryos were able to pull vast
amounts of gases like hydrogen and helium toward them, providing the extensive gaseous atmospheres in these planets.

According to the theory of star formation, planets should form as natural byproducts during the birth of stars. The first planet around a solartype star was discovered in 1995, and by July 2009, over 350 planets
(“extrasolar planets”) had been discovered around nearby solar-type stars. The detection methods are most sensitive to finding large planets
close to the stars; therefore, almost all planets discovered to date have been gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn. Most of the systems have also
been very different from our Solar System, with the gas giants close to the central star. In the future, improved observational methods may be
able to detect Earth-sized planets around other stars, and discover true Solar System analogs (planetary systems with rocky planets near the
star and gas giants further out). But even now, the observations have confirmed the theoretical expectation that planetary systems around
stars are quite common.

An eclipse is a phenomenon where one object passes into the shadow of another, so a lunar eclipse occurs when the moon passes into Earth’s shadow.
During a solar eclipse, the earth passes into the moon’s shadow. Because the moon’s shadow is much smaller than that of the earth, a solar eclipse will be
visible from only a portion of the earth’s surface. There are 3 types of solar eclipse - Total, partial, annual Solar eclipses.

Galileo Galilei was born in 1564 in Italy. Galileo made many important contributions to physics and astronomy, and can quite rightly be described as
the first true modern scientist. This is because Galileo rejected the notion that philosophical or religious arguments could give us meaningful information about how the natural world worked. Instead, Galileo believed that the
only criteria for telling whether a scientific hypothesis was correct or not was observation and experiment. 

Johannes Kepler was born in southern Germany 25 years after Tycho, and  was a mathematician, astronomer, numerologist (i.e. someone who believes
in the mystical properties of numbers), and a Copernican. As a young man, Kepler wrote a book on the spacing of the planets (based upon a numerological idea concerning the 5 regular polyhedrons), and sent copies to several
people, including Tycho and Galileo. Although the underlying premise of the book was questionable, the book showed that Kepler possessed significant mathematical skill. Because of this, Tycho invited Kepler to come to
Prague and help him with the calculation of the new tables. Soon after Kepler had joined him, Tycho died. Before Tycho’s death however, he had
named Kepler as his successor. Being a Copernican, Kepler began work on the new tables using a Copernican model, not Tycho’s. It took 5 years for
Kepler to analyze the data for Mars

Science is a systematic method for discovering the basic laws of nature.

The solar syatem is comprised of a single star, orbited by several major bodies (planets) and many minor bodies. The planes of the orbits of the planets
are closely aligned with one another (recall that the orbits of the planets lay close to the ecliptic), meaning that it is not unreasonable to think of the
solar system as a flat structure. Radioactive dating of rocks and meteorites suggest that the solar system formed approximately 4.6 billion years ago.
Over 99 % of the mass in the solar system is in the sun, making it the dominant gravitational influence in the solar system.
The Sun is composed largely of hydrogen and helium (the two lightest elements in the universe), with only 1-2 % of heavier elements. This composition is typical for stars, and in fact for our galaxy as a whole.
The Sun also blows a steady wind of particles outward into space. The solar wind has pushed out the interstellar gas in its vicinity making a bubble
of radius 100-200 AU, that is referred to as the heliosphere.

Solar flares are explosive releases of energy, that can be seen as bright flashes on the sun, and can last from minutes to hours. Large amounts of electromagnetic radiation can be given off during flares, at wavelengths from the radio
through the x-ray. Flares are thought to be produced by the local restructuring of the solar magnetic field in the region where the flare is produced.
The released magnetic energy during this process heats gas at the flare site to millions of degrees, creating the observed electromagnetic radiation.
Continuous observation of the corona in white light from satellites shows that the corona is constantly ejecting parts of itself, at speeds from a few hundred
to a few thousand kilometers per second. These coronal mass ejections happen more often around the peak of the magnetic cycle. The fastest coronal
mass ejections drive shocks into the solar wind, which can accelerate large bursts of energetic particles into the inner solar system. Like solar flares, coronal mass ejections seem to be a symptom of restructuring of the solar
magnetic field.

Aurora’s are caused by fluorescence of atoms and molecules in Earth’s atmosphere excited by collisions with energetic charged particles.

The current wisdom among astro-biologists is, if you want to know where to look for life elsewhere in the universe, follow the water. This is because
many of the chemical reactions necessary for life as we know it occur only when the reactants are dissolved in liquid water. The evidence that Mars had liquid water on its surface in its past suggests
it might have once (and maybe still does) harbors life. The whole question of life on Mars actually has a somewhat disreputable past. In the early
1900’s for example, Percival Lowell reported with confidence the presence of an intricate network of canals on Mars; canals built by intelligent beings. Although these claims received much attention in the popular press at the
time, it turns out the putative canals were actually due to a combination of the human brains pattern matching abilities (which are so good that it can
discern patterns, even in random noise where no pattern exists), and a too willing to believe mind set on the part of Lowell.

Difference between a solar system, galaxy and universe is - solar system is a star (or maybe a few stars all orbiting around eachother) and the things that are going around them, like planets and meteors while
Galaxies are huge collections of stars, normally at least many millions of stars (and their solar systems) and finally, the universe is made up of a huge number of galaxies (billions?), it's the words we use to describe everything that exists.

The planets probably formed at different times, but we have no real way of measuring that. All the material in our solar system is around 4.5 billion years old (which is when it was all created from said previous star).
When that matter clumped together to form individual planets is hard to say, but it all probably happened within millions of years of each other.

And this same process is likely what created the planets all throughout the Milkyway, but they were not in sync with the creation of planets within our solar system. For example, exoplanet Kepler-452 is estimated to be around 6 billion years old, so is 1.5 billion years older than our own planet.

Everything in the Solar System revolves around the Sun. The Sun is a star – a massive ball of hot gas that gives off light and heat.
There are eight planets that orbit around the Sun.
The closest planet to the Sun is Mercury, and the farthest away is Neptune.
The biggest planet is Jupiter, and the smallest planet is Mercury.
The Earth is the only planet that we know has creatures living on it.
The Earth rotates as it orbits the Sun. It takes one day to complete a rotation.
It takes 365 days for the Earth to complete one circuit around the Sun. We call this a year.
The Sun is just one of hundreds of billions of stars in the galaxy that we live in, which is called the Milky Way. The whole Universe has at least 100 billion galaxies in it.
You are held onto the surface of the Earth by a force called gravity. This is the same force that keeps the Earth and the other planets orbiting around the Sun.
Not everything in the Solar system orbits directly around the Sun. The Moon orbits around the Earth.
he Sun is 93 million miles from the Earth. The light from the Sun only takes 8 minutes to travel to the Earth, but it would take Usain Bolt – the fastest man on Earth – 450 years to run from the Sun to the Earth.
The Earth travels around the Sun in a loop that is shaped a bit like an oval. We call this the Earth’s orbit.
The Earth is always spinning around – sometimes from where you stand on the Earth you can see the Sun (this is the daytime) and sometimes the part of the Earth where you are is facing away from the Sun so it is dark (this is the nightime). It takes 24 hours for the Earth to spin all the way around, and we call this a day. Find out more about night and day.
There are eight planets that orbit around the Sun. In order, going from the closest planet to the Sun, to the one that is farthest away, they are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
All of the planets and the Sun are round, like balls.
There is a lot of difference between the planets. Some planets like Earth are made of rock, and some like Jupiter are made of gas. The hottest planet is Venus where the average temperature is 460°C, and the coldest is Uranus, which is -220°C.
Mars is sometimes the called ‘the red planet’ because the rocks that it is made from are red. It is the closest planet to Earth, and is slightly smaller than Earth.
The biggest planet is Jupiter. Jupiter is made of gas and is so big that you could fit 1,321 planets the size of Earth inside it. There is even a storm on Jupiter that is bigger than Earth – this storm has been blowing for hundreds of years and is called the ‘Great Red Spot’.
Saturn is famous for having rings of small pieces of ice and dust around it. Like Jupiter, it is made of gas and is much bigger than Earth.
The Moon is a ball of rock that orbits around the Earth, in the same way that the Earth orbits around the Sun. It is much smaller than the Earth and takes 28 days to complete one orbit. The Moon is 239,000 miles away and is the only place in the Solar System that man has travelled to apart from Earth. Find out more about human space exploration.
Other planets have moons too. Jupiter has at least 66 of them!
It takes just over 365 days for the Earth to travel all the way around the Sun. We call the length of time it takes to go around the Sun a year, but to make life easier, most years have 365 days and every 4th year has 366 days. We call a year with 366 days a leap year. The extra day is February 29th. 2012 was a leap year, and 2016 and 2020 will be leap years.

The same force that holds you on the surface of the Earth so that you don’t float away when you jump, is what keeps the Moon revolving around the Earth and the Earth revolving around the Sun. This force is called gravity and the first man to discover that it existed was Sir Isaac Newton in the 17th century.

Earth is the only planet on which we know that there have been plants and animals living. On some planets there is no air to breathe and on others it is either too hot or too cold. Some scientists think that creatures may have lived on Mars millions of years ago, when Mars was warmer and had more air – they try to find evidence to show this is true.

Until 2006, people thought that there were nine planets in the Solar System. The ninth planet was Pluto and it is even further away from the Sun than Neptune. Astronomers decided that Pluto was too small to be called a planet, so now there are only eight planets.

The Sun is a star, a huge ball of very hot gas. The temperature of the Sun is around 5,500°C – it’s so hot that you can feel the heat from it on Earth, millions of miles away, and see by the light that it gives out. The Sun is about 4.5 billion years old and will last until it is about 10 billion years old.

There are more than 100 billion stars in the Milky Way and there are many different types of star. Our Sun is of a type called a “yellow dwarf”. Scientists group stars together by how big they are and how bright they are. Some examples are red dwarfs and supergiants. A red dwarf is a star about half the size of the Sun and a lot less bright than the Sun. A supergiant star is about 70 times as big as the Sun and can be 100,000 times as bright.

The nearest star to the Earth after the Sun is Proxima Centuri. It is red dwarf that is smaller and colder than our Sun and gives off a lot less light. Even though it is the closest star outside the Solar System, the light from it is too faint to see except with a telescope. Proxima Centuri is 24 trillion miles from Earth and light from it takes four years and three months to reach Earth.
Mercury – this is the closest planet to the Sun. It is the smallest planet and is made of rock. It is so close to the Sun that it only takes 88 days for it to complete its orbit and is much hotter than Earth.

Venus – Venus is the next planet from the Sun after Mercury. It is also made of rock. Like Earth, Venus has an atmosphere (air) around it, but it is a lot thicker than Earth’s and Venus is permanently covered in clouds. Venus is the hottest planet and has an average temperature of 460°C. It is about the same size as Earth. It takes 225 days to travel around the Sun.

Earth – This is where we live! Earth is made of rock and is the only planet where water is liquid. The other planets are either too hot or too cold. Earth takes 365 days to travel around the Sun.

Mars – Mars is a little smaller than Earth, but a lot further out. It used to have an atmosphere like Earth and Venus, but it doesn’t have very much anymore. Mars is reddish in colour and is sometimes called ‘The Red Planet’. Mars takes 687 days to complete its orbit pf the Sun and the average temperature is -63°C.

Jupiter – Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System. You could fit 1,321 Earths inside Jupiter. It is made of gas and is one of the four ‘gas giants’. Jupiter has 66 moons; one of them, Ganymede, is bigger than Mercury. Jupiter is five times as far from the Sun as the Earth is and takes almost 12 years to travel around the Sun.

Saturn – Saturn is famous for its rings. The rings were first observed (with a telescope) in 1610 by Galileo and are made up of huge numbers of small lumps of ice and dust (mostly ice). The pieces in the rings may be as small as a millimetre or as large as a few metres across. Saturn is the second largest planet in the Solar System and is another one of the ‘gas giants’ like Jupiter. It takes 29.5 years to travel around the Sun.

Uranus – Uranus is another of the ‘gas giants’. You could fit 63 planets the size of Earth inside Uranus. Uranus takes 84 years to orbit the Sun and is the coldest planet, with an average temperature of -220°C.

Neptune – Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun. It is 30 times as far from the sun as Earth and takes 165 years to travel around the Sun. Neptune is the last of the four ‘gas giants’ and is 58 times the volume of Earth.
Asteroid – Asteroids are bodies of rock and ice in space. Millions of asteroids orbit the Sun -most between Mars and Jupiter. They vary in size between 1 metre across and 600 miles across.
Atmosphere – the layer of gas around a planet
Comet – a comet is a body of ice, dust and bits of rock that passes through space leaving a tail of ice and dust behind it. A comet may be up to 25 miles across.
Day – the length of time it takes the Earth to spin all the way around so that you get a night and a day – 24 hours
Galaxy – a large group of stars, all orbiting a central point.
Gravity – the force that attracts a moon to a planet, or a planet to a star
Light Year – the distance that light travels in one year. 5.9 trillion miles
Meteor – a small piece of debris in space, up to the size of a boulder
Milky Way – the galaxy that we live in
Moon – A moon is a smaller object orbiting a planet. Some planets have many moons. Earth has just one, called The Moon.
Orbit – the path that a planet takes around the Sun, or that a moon takes around a planet
Planet – a large body of either rock or gas that follows a consistent orbit around a star
Shooting star – This isn’t really a star! A shooting star is a meteor that is passing through the Earth’s atmosphere and has got so hot that it glows in the night sky.
Solar System – the Sun and the collection of stars
Star – A star is a huge ball of very hot gases, that gives off lots of light and heat. Some stars have planets orbiting around them, but not all do.
Sun – the star in our Solar System
Universe – The Universe is everything that exists: all the galaxies, all the stars, all the planets and everything in between
Year – the length of time it takes the Earth to travel around the Sun, 365 days